[GIRL] You wanna walk to a place
that's different than this one,
don't you?
To the warm place
full of secrets?
To the world where
every day is fun?
That's what you've wanted
all along, isn't it?
Okay, then.
Let's go... together.
@ [music playing]
[small boy laughing obnoxiously]
[BOY] Hey, Mommy, look. Look!
[MOTHER] Hang on a sec.
[BOY] Come on, Mommy!
[USHIO] Hey...
What is it?
Play with me.
All right, well, what do
you do with Sanae?
She reads me books.
Did you bring any
books with you?
What about with the old man?
Baseball.
You play baseball?
[USHIO] Like this.
[in a deep voice] Komada!
Are you doing an impression?
You mean, it isn't funny?
It's not funny at all.
That's too bad.
What the heck is he
teaching her?
[BOY loudly] Mommy! Hey!
Mommy, listen to me!
[MOTHER] Shh, okay? Sit down.
[BOY] I don't wanna!
[MOTHER] Be quiet! You're
causing a scene. [BOY] Come on,
Mommy, now!
[BOY]
But you're not listening, Mommy!
SHUT UP!
There are other people on
this train, you know!
Sorry... [BOY] Mommy...
I'll keep him quiet.
Dammit...
Ushio?
[TOMOYA]
Where the heck did she go?
Gimme a break.
Ushio, let me know first if
you're going to the bathroom,
okay?
[TOMOYA] What's wrong?
You weren't crying, were you?
C'mon, don't lie to me.
[USHIO] I'm not supposed to cry.
Huh? Who told you that?
[USHIO] Sanae.
Sanae?
Even she can be strict, huh?
Who knew?
[USHIO] But she said there's one
place where it's okay to cry.
And where is that?
In the bathroom.
Fair enough. I guess nobody
would see you crying if you did
it in the bathroom.
But if you feel like crying, I
don't think you should have to
hold back.
[TOMOYA] You should cry
while you still can.
When you get bigger,
sometimes you can't cry.
Even if you have something
you want to cry about...
Hey.
Want me to buy you a toy?
[TOMOYA] Pick whatever you want.
It's on me.
[USHIO] Okay.
[TOMOYA] Hey.
Maybe you'd like
this one instead?
It's fine if you don't like it.
Well, I mean, you'd probably
rather have a girl's toy, right?
Instead of a robot...
Girl toys are boring.
I like robots.
Well, there's no harm I guess.
It's just a little strange.
No, never mind. Keep playing.
I wonder if she's enjoying
her summer vacation.
Probably not, since she's
stuck with a guy like me.
[TOMOYA] What's wrong?
Gotta potty.
Number two.
[TOMOYA]
It's dark, so be careful.
'Kay.
[USHIO] I did it all by myself.
Good for you.
So, what is it this time?
What is that thing?
Oh, it's a firefly.
You know what that is, right?
I've never seen one before.
They must come out later here.
Something wrong?
What, do you I have something
funny on my face?
Then stop staring at me like
that. It's not very polite.
C'mon, what do you want?
If there's something you wanna
say, then just say it.
I get it. You won't talk 'cause
you're still afraid of me,
aren't you?
All right, out with it already.
I promise I won't
yell anymore, okay?
I want you to tell me
about my mommy.
Why don't you ask Sanae?
I did, but she wouldn't
say anything to me.
Wants me to tell you, huh?
Ask Sanae when we get back.
Say that you asked me and I
wouldn't tell you anything.
Ushio, don't fall asleep now.
[TOMOYA] Here! Gotta put your
hat on the right way.
Hope you're ready to go, we got
a whole lot of walking to do.
Let's go. [USHIO] Okay.
This is amazing.
Do you wanna have a better view?
Uh-huh! [TOMOYA] 'Kay.
Here, spread your feet
apart for me.
Wow, you're really light.
Look!
How is it?
[USHIO] Wow! It's so pretty!
[TOMOYA] Don't go too far.
Stay where I can see you!
I guess taking this trip was
worth it after all. [Ushio
laughing and playing]
What's wrong?
[USHIO] It's gone.
What do you mean?
I lost my toy.
It's not over here.
You sure you didn't accidentally
run off and play somewhere else?
Well, if you were only
playing over here,
then it seems like we should've
found the thing already.
Ushio, let's just
forget about it.
I'll buy another one just like
it on the way home, okay?
But I want that one.
It's gone now.
There's nothing we can do.
Who taught you to
be so stubborn?
[TOMOYA] Ushio!
I'm gonna go further down the
way for a little bit, all right?
Just stay there for now.
[USHIO] Okay.
[TOMOYA] What is this?
It feels like I've
been here before.
[WOMAN] You're Tomoya Okazaki,
aren't you?
[TOMOYA] Uh, yes, ma'am.
But, uh...
Have we met somewhere before?
[WOMAN] Yes, although you
were quite young.
My name is Shino Okazaki.
Okazaki?
I'm your grandmother, Tomoya.
Naoyuki Okazaki is my son.
[SHINO] I was contacted by
someone named Furukawa.
She said that you would
eventually come if I waited
here.
[TOMOYA]
So, Sanae planned this...
You've grown so much
since I last saw you.
I'm sorry,
I don't remember at all.
Well, I can hardly blame you
since you were so young.
We met right on this spot,
actually,
shortly after your mother
Atsuko passed away.
I haven't spoken to your father
in quite a while.
Is he still paying
for his crime?
No, he's been released
from prison.
He's back home as far as I know.
Such a shame;
It must have been hard on you.
Not really.
He may have been brash when he
was younger, but he certainly
wasn't THAT foolish.
Both Atsuko and your father were
still in high school when they
got engaged,
so of course,
we were against the marriage.
After the wedding, your father
dropped out of school.
He could only afford a tiny
apartment, but they wanted to
live on their own.
Still, they both seemed
so happy back then.
After all, he was caring for
the woman he loved.
It was probably all he
ever wanted in life.
It wasn't too long after that
when Atsuko became pregnant with
you.
You were certainly
a blessing to them.
They were thrilled to have you.
Unfortunately, all good things
must come to an end, I suppose.
It wasn't long after you were
born that Atsuko passed away in
an accident.
It was so crushing for Naoyuki.
At first, I thought he would
never recover from his
depression.
But he was strong.
He held on to what hope he could
muster and kept pushing on.
Do you know why?
He couldn't give up on life,
because he was left with you,
Tomoya.
He was determined to
raise you on his own.
It was long ago,
but I'll never forget that day,
when he walked away from here,
holding your hand and smiling.
Perhaps you remember now?
The days after that were
the toughest in his life.
I can't even imagine how
hard he had to work.
He was fired from one
job after another
and forced to move from place to
place just to keep his head
above water.
Still, he always did his
best to care for you.
He would try to cheer you up
with toys or sweets whenever he
could spare a little money.
He sacrificed everything for
you, but he refused to leave you
behind.
I'm sure he was strict,
perhaps even violent at times,
but in his heart, I know the
only thing he wanted was to
raise you well,
even if you were too young
to understand that.
But it was a very hard life for
him, and nobody's perfect.
I know he often turned to
alcohol to forget his troubles
at work.
I'm sure that must've been hard
for you, dealing with an
alcoholic father.
And I'm sure he did some
terrible things when he was
drunk.
But please keep in mind that he
chose to live this life with
you,
no matter how painful
it was for him.
And so you grew up.
Before long, you were
a fine young man
who was old enough to make
decisions about his own life.
But by then, Naoyuki had
already lost everything.
His career, his reputation,
his friends,
and even the love of his son,
I'm sure.
Furukawa told me that you're
suffering in the same way that
Naoyuki was back then.
I'm truly sorry to hear that.
You know, that's the reason
I came here today.
That's why I wanted to tell
you everything that I did.
Because you can understand now;
You can appreciate what kind of
father Naoyuki was.
[TOMOYA] He'd come home on his
break and bring me candy.
He always held my hand and
we'd go on walks together.
It's sad how easily
I forgot all that.
Tomoya, even though I know
you're not fond of Naoyuki,
do you think he's a
failure as a father?
Not really.
I'm a bigger failure as a person
than he ever was as a father.
Right now, I'm standing in the
same place that my dad did.
But I don't feel like fighting.
I feel like giving up.
All I can think of is how
weak and pathetic I am.
[chuckles]
You're not unlike him, you know.
I think he's weak and pathetic
in his own way, as well.
But even if he wasn't perfect, I
know he worked hard and did
everything he could for you.
For that reason, no matter what
happens, I'll always be proud of
him.
As a man, my son may have his
fair share of short comings,
but as a father, I truly believe
that he did a good job.
[TOMOYA] I...
I think so too.
And there's nothing more
I could ask for.
[SHINO] Thank you so much
for saying that.
[Shino chuckles]
Oh, this such a relief for me.
Tomoya, your father has
worked too hard.
It's time for him to take
a well-deserved break.
Please tell him that
his job is done.
Tell him that it's all right
to come home now.
I'll be right here
waiting for him.
There's no reason for him
to suffer anymore.
[TOMOYA] Ushio!
Did you find it?
Oh, is that your little girl?
Yeah, her name's Ushio.
[TOMOYA] Were you searching
for it all this time?
[USHIO] Uh-huh.
[TOMOYA] I see...
Ushio, I'm sorry to
have to say this,
but we may not be
able to find it.
We've done everything we can.
All I can do now is buy
you a new one, okay?
But that...
But that was the only one.
No, there was a whole bunch
of them at the store.
But that's the one
you picked out.
That's the robot you bought me.
That was the first time...
Daddy.
[TOMOYA] Ushio... [USHIO] Hm?
[TOMOYA]
You've been lonely, huh?
[USHIO] Uh-huh.
[TOMOYA] Did you have a fun
trip, even though you were with
a mean guy like me?
[USHIO] Uh-huh.
[TOMOYA] I see...
Ushio, can I...
Is it okay if I stay with you?
I know...
I know that I've been a bad
daddy for a long time.
But from now on, I wanna work
hard to take care of you, Ushio.
So even if it's tough, is it
okay if I stay with you?
Mm-hmm.
You really mean it?
I want you to stay.
[TOMOYA] Thank you.
[USHIO] But... but I'm still sad
'cause I lost something I can't
get back.
Daddy?
Umm...
[quiet sniffles]
I don't...
I don't have to hold it
in anymore, right?
Just like you said on the train?
Right?
'Cause Sanae, she...
[big sniffle]
She told me the only times I can
cry are when I'm in the
bathroom, or...
or when I'm in Daddy's arms.
[TOMOYA sobbing] I'm sorry...
I'm sorry...
I'm so sorry.
Hey, Ushio.
I could tell you about
Mommy if you'd like that.
Mm-hmm.
Okay then, come sit over here.
Now, where do I start...
Back in high school, Mommy was
having a tough time, so she
cried a lot.
That was back when we first met.
She didn't believe in
herself very much.
I remember she was standing at
the bottom of the hill at our
high school.
And do you know what she did
while she was standing there
that morning?
She closed her eyes
and she said "anpan."
That was a funny habit
Mommy had.
When she was afraid, she would
say what she wanted to eat out
loud
and it would make
her brave again.
Back then, Sanae was always busy
with work and didn't have time
to make lunch for Mommy.
Of course, Mommy would've been
happy if she had Sanae's food,
and maybe Sanae could make
time if she had to,
but Mommy was too nice
to ask her.
That's what your Mommy was like;
Really sweet.
Let's see, what else...
Uh, she, uh...
Ah, your mommy...
Mommy was...
Nagisa...
Daddy...
Silly, why are you crying too?
Sorry, it's nothing bad.
I was just thinking of Mommy.
Okay, let's get back
to the story.
Back in high school, Mommy was
really excited about putting on
a play.
Have you ever seen
a play before?
[TOMOYA] Nagisa,
I found it.
I finally found it.
Something only
I can protect.
A precious treasure that
only I can protect.
It was right here.
Right in front of
me, all along.
@ [music playing]
We're home!
Welcome back you two!
Finally decided to wake up, huh?
Welcome back to the world
of the living, kid.
So, you love the
Big Dango Family too, huh?
[USHIO] Uh-huh.
Sanae told me that it
smells like Mommy.
[TOMOYA] I'm home.